{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2639
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fmodern\fcharset0 CourierNewPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15700\viewh5880\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Chapter 1: \
\
Location- Maricao State Forest \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf0 \cb2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 center: [-66.98161, 18.13930],\cb1 \
\cb2 zoom: 13.77,\cb1 \
\cb2 pitch: 45.00,\cb1 \
\cb2 bearing: 0.00\
\
description: 
\f0\fs22 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 The Maricao State Forest is a reserve of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico that currently has 10,803 cuerdas (10,492 acres or 4,251 hectares). The reserve is located on the western end of the Central Mountain Range spread over the municipalities of San Germ\'e1n, Sabana Grande and Maricao. The Department of Natural and Environmental Resources (DNER), of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico manages the forest, while the Puerto Rico\'92s National Park Company runs an Ecological Park, which was previously used, as Vacation Center of the Maricao State Forest. It is an important watershed with creeks, tributaries and rivers that feed the coastal plains of Mayag\'fcez, San Germ\'e1n and A\'f1asco. The forests contain, according to the experts, a high biodiversity of flora and fauna, in addition to the exotic species of trees planted by the CCC.
\fs14 1 
\fs22 The State Forest is one of the key recreational areas in the southwest coast of Puerto Rico, and receives a large number of visitors who make a stop at the Observation Tower, the Hatchery and the DNER recreational facilities that offer picnic areas and a vista point.\
\
The Maricao State Forest is a reserve of 10,803 cuerdas (10,492 acres) located on the big island of Puerto Rico. This reserve was created between 1933 and 1942 through US settler-colonial forest conservation programming, namely the New Deal Era\'92s Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) programming. The CCC programming was not the first colonial government to have interest in this forested area. }