{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2639
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Light;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Light;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f5\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;
\f6\fnil\fcharset0 Menlo-Regular;\f7\fmodern\fcharset0 CourierNewPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
\red10\green83\blue134;\red38\green38\blue38;\red38\green38\blue38;\red38\green38\blue38;\red15\green92\blue133;
\red19\green19\blue19;\red255\green255\blue255;\red16\green93\blue135;\red194\green125\blue100;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red16\green93\blue134;\red38\green38\blue38;\red15\green92\blue134;\red255\green255\blue255;\red194\green125\blue100;
\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue255;\red38\green38\blue38;
\red15\green92\blue133;\red29\green29\blue29;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c27059\c27059\c27059;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
\cssrgb\c0\c40392\c59608;\cssrgb\c19912\c19912\c19912;\cssrgb\c19912\c19912\c19912;\cssrgb\c19934\c19934\c19909;\cssrgb\c3401\c43838\c59401;
\cssrgb\c9821\c9821\c9821;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c99971\c0;\cssrgb\c3878\c44450\c59999;\cssrgb\c80765\c56762\c46655;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c99985;
\cssrgb\c3719\c44246\c59800;\cssrgb\c19956\c19956\c19906;\cssrgb\c3560\c44042\c59600;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c99985\c0;\cssrgb\c80772\c56796\c46790;
\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c99971;\cssrgb\c0\c1\c1;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c99956\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c99971\c0;\cssrgb\c19934\c19934\c19909;
\cssrgb\c3401\c43838\c59401;\cssrgb\c14902\c14902\c14902;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww22160\viewh12160\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Chapter 1: Intro
\f1\b0 \ulnone \

\f2 \AppleTypeServices\AppleTypeServicesF65539 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\AppleTypeServices \cf0 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec4 center: [-65.86788, 16.89670],\
zoom: 5.97,\
pitch: 45.00,\
bearing: -156.00\AppleTypeServices\AppleTypeServicesF65539 \cf2 \cb1 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa400\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\'93Every place has an energy, a vibration\'94 - Dr. Michelle Montgomery, Rising Voices, Changing Coasts 2023 [{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rvcchub.org/#:~:text=The%20Rising%20Voices%2C%20Changing%20Coasts,systems%20in%20coastal%20populated%20environments."}}{\fldrslt https://www.rvcchub.org/#:~:text=The%20Rising%20Voices%2C%20Changing%20Coasts,systems%20in%20coastal%20populated%20environments.}}]\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa400\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \'93Every place has a climate story\'94 - Dr. Marcy Rockman [link to Mary Rockman presentation {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://downloads.ctfassets.net/bffpuh1irj9k/7eXm6T0Z5hB0TG6wCP6R8Y/05f265f26a72c0408451cc0c34fdf08d/Get_to_Know_Marcy.pdf"}}{\fldrslt https://downloads.ctfassets.net/bffpuh1irj9k/7eXm6T0Z5hB0TG6wCP6R8Y/05f265f26a72c0408451cc0c34fdf08d/Get_to_Know_Marcy.pdf}}]\cf2 \
Description: Here, on this site, you will find a story about conservation, culture, and climate change in the archipelago of Borink\'e9n (also called Puerto Rico). This story lives in conversation with contemporary unmapping and counter mapping projects throughout the US and the Caribbean which highlight rich legacies of survivance in the wake of interconnected forces: climate change and (settler) colonialism. This project is a work-in-progress that engages conversations about the limitations of settler conservation (a l\'e1 John Muir) and amplifies the enduring eco-cultural (ecological and cultural) kinship of care Afro- and Indigenous- Caribbean peoples continue to maintain with the (is)land(s). This caring kinship is key to climate justice, energy equity, and to building good futures in Borink\'e9n and across all the islands that repeat where the Caribbean and the Atlantic meet.\
I, Ang\'e9lica De Jes\'fas, offer this project with gratitude for all those who make this work possible, with respect to all which this project may connect, and humility to accept any errors here as my own.  
\f3 \AppleTypeServices\AppleTypeServicesF65539 \
unmapping: 
\f2 \AppleTypeServices\AppleTypeServicesF65539 ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/spatialhumanities/chapter/beyond-counter-mapping-unmapping-remapping-emergence-disenchantment/"}}{\fldrslt https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/spatialhumanities/chapter/beyond-counter-mapping-unmapping-remapping-emergence-disenchantment/}}) \
survivance: ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://decolonialdictionary.wordpress.com/2021/04/15/survivance/"}}{\fldrslt https://decolonialdictionary.wordpress.com/2021/04/15/survivance/}})\
conservation: ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/primate-diaries/how-john-muir-s-brand-of-conservation-led-to-the-decline-of-yosemite/"}}{\fldrslt https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/primate-diaries/how-john-muir-s-brand-of-conservation-led-to-the-decline-of-yosemite}}/)\
caribbean: ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://archipelagosjournal.org/es/issue05/goffe-unmapping.html"}}{\fldrslt 
\f4 \AppleTypeServices \cf5 \ul \ulc5 http://archipelagosjournal.org/es/issue05/goffe-unmapping.html}}
\f4 \AppleTypeServices \cf5 \ul \ulc5 )\

\f2 \AppleTypeServices\AppleTypeServicesF65539 \cf2 \ulnone settler colonialism: 
\f4 \AppleTypeServices \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ulc0 Chapter 2: Conservation in Borink\'e9n\
\cb3 \ulc4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec4 center: [-65.88252, 18.03668],\
zoom: 13.01,\
pitch: 30.34,\
bearing: -0.70
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul \ulc4 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \cb1 \ulc0 \

\f3\b0 \cf6 \ulnone Google the words \'93conservation in Puerto Rico\'94 and you may receive results from a wide variety of governmental, non-profit, tourist, work-force development and education institutions. Some of these results may include links to web pages with summaries on the relationship between conservation and sustainability or tourist-centered fact sheets about Puerto Rico\'92s rich biodiversity. You might even find information about US governmental organizations seeking community input to protect tinglares, the leather back sea turtles who return often to the shores of many Caribbean islands, including Puerto Rico. \
\
Google the words \'93conservation in Borink\'e9n\'94 and you may receive results\cf7  that showcase what the previous search terms omit or obscure: the ways in which Afro- and Indigenous descendant communes continue to care for eco-systems in the Caribbean through heritage and traditional ways, climate resilient conservation practices in their own right.  \
\
On the map to your [left] you\'92ll find just one example of one such climate resilient conservation practices occurring in the south eastern mountains of Borink\'e9n. \
\
Keep scrolling for more. \
\
** Include Departamento de la Agricultura\cf6 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf8 \ul \ulc9 Chapter 3: IALA\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec4 center: [\outl0\strokewidth0 -66.17071, 18.11296\outl0\strokewidth0 ],\
zoom: 13.45,\
pitch: 45.00,\
bearing: 0.00\
\cf10 \cb11 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul \ulc12 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf10 \cb11 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec13 IALA, el Instituto para la Agroecolog\'eda, is a nascent agroecology farm and education center located in the central eastern mountain ranges of Borink\'e9n. IALA is cooperatively managed by several families and directed by Katia R. Avil\'e9s V\'e1zquez, MS, PhD. Click here <a href="https://www.iala-pr.org/programas">here<a/> for more.
\f6\fs24 \cf10 \cb1 \strokec14 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f4\fs36 \cf10 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0  \cf16 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf16 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf16 \

\f5\b \cf8 \ul \ulc9 Chapter 4: Bosque del Pueblo\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf10 \cb18 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec4 center: [-66.67960, 18.17683],\
zoom: 13.55,\
pitch: 45.00,\
bearing: 16.00\cf10 \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul \ulc15 \outl0\strokewidth0 \

\f5\b \cf8 \cb1 \ulc9 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf10 \cb18 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec19 'This forest project is managed by Casa Pueblo <a href="https://casapueblo.org/las-mujeres-y-la-energia-solar/">Casa Pueblo<a/>, an agro-ecological and environmental non-profit which was established in the 1980s, among the founding members are Sra. Tinti Dey\'e1 D\'edaz, Ing. (Engineer) Alexis Massol Gonz\'e1lez, and a cadre of volunteers.'\cf10 \cb18 \strokec20 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf6 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf6 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf8 \ul \ulc9 Chapter 5: Reserva Natural Cueva del Indio\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf10 \cb18 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec4 center: [-66.64439, 18.49266],\
zoom: 13.48,\
pitch: 45.00,\
bearing: 0.00
\f7 \
\

\f2 \cf16 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 La Cueva del Indio is an ecological and archaeological reserve on the coast of Arecibo known for its spiritual significance to Taino peoples. While the site is at risk of damage from climate change and development, it is not listed as a site for cultural climate protection under the National Park Service < a href= \'93{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.nps.gov/subjects/climatechange/southeastclimatescience.htm"}}{\fldrslt https://www.nps.gov/subjects/climatechange/southeastclimatescience.htm}}\'94>National Park Service<a/> 
\f5\b \cf8 \ul \ulc9 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf8 \
Chapter 6: Bosque Estatal de Maricao
\f0 \cf0 \ulc5 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf21 \ulnone \
\cf7 Location- Maricao State Forest \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf7 \cb22 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
center: [-66.98161, 18.13661],\
zoom: 12.74,\
pitch: 45.00,\
bearing: 0.00\cb23 \
\
Description: \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 In the map on the left of this screen is a map image of the Maricao State Forest, located on the big island of Borink\'e9n and\cb1  made up of 10,803 of conserved cuerdas (10,492 acres). These 10,803 cuerdas serves as a watershed to the coastal plains, are rich in biodiverse flora and fauna, and are currently managed by the Puerto Rican Department of Natural and Environmental Resources (DNER). \
\
Created in 1933 and 1942  New Deal Era\'92s Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) programming. The CCC programming was not the first colonial government to have interest in this forested area. \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf8 \ul \ulc9 \
\
Chapter 7: El Yunque
\f3\b0 \cf6 \ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf7 \cb22 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf7 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \

\f5\b \cf24 \ul \ulc25 Chapter 8: Outro \

\f2\b0 \cf7 \ulnone \
What started as a research question about the coloniality of natural resource management and conservation policy in Puerto Rico, has become project mapping\cf26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 eco-cultural conservation across Borinken.  Whereas settler colonial conservation is primarily concerned with flora and fauna, eco-cultural conservation is concerned with the intergenerational connections between Afro and Indigenous descendant peoples and their ecosystems and establishing those relationships as vital to conservation and climate mitigation long-term. For this project I focus primarily on forest mountain regions in part because of my ancestral connection and in part to continue effort to highlight the eco-cultural relationship between mountains and coastal ecologies. Conservation must address both; the survival of one is linked with the survival of the other. \
\cf7 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  \
This project is ongoing, so if you have any ideas, comments, or concerns please email me at dejesu16@msu.edu\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \ul Chapter 9: About the Author\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf7 \ulnone Location- Nkwejong [where the rivers meet], Michigan\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf7 \cb22 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
center: [, ],\
zoom: ,\
pitch: ,\
bearing: 0.00\
\
I\'92m Ang\'e9lica De Jesus, doctoral student and literal mami living and visiting in Nkewjong, Michigan. My mother\'92s people are from Mexico and my fathers people are from Borink\'e9n. Nkwejong, like much of the Great Lakes region, is the contemporary and ancestral homelands of the Anishinaabeg people\'92s, the Confederacy of the People of the Three Fires. Like the Caribbean, it is a place forged of blood and violence, but also shaped by the survival of Indigenous and Black/Afro-descendant peoples. I, like many other Michigan State University students, are specially indebted (in a good way) to the Anishinaabeg people\'92s whose continual surivance in the face of settler colonialism, shapes the worlds and landscapes upon which MSU exists and that we learn and benefit from today. As an MSU instructor and student I\'92m honored to work towards being in good relationship with Indigenous peoples of this place and I\'92m honored work towards being a good prima-de-afuera to all my Caribbean cousins, human and more than human. \
\
\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf7 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  from emergent organizations whose conservation efforts are explicitly rooted culture and heritage. For instance emerging initiatives around agroforestry ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&source=web&rct=j&opi=89978449&url=https://elgrito.org/boriken-forest-reservation-project/&ved=2ahUKEwjd0aOE79qFAxU8kYkEHT7wBUYQFnoECBkQAQ&usg=AOvVaw3pQ2rzqRRt10V7M_8pKzps"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 Borik\'e9n Forestry Project - El Gritoelgrito.orghttps://elgrito.org \'9b boriken-forest-reservation-project}}), community stewardship of beaches, and mapping Indigenous kinship networks ( {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://solve.mit.edu/challenges/2024-indigenous-communities/solutions/83517"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 https://solve.mit.edu/challenges/2024-indigenous-communities/solutions/83517}}) as strategy to make stronger case for sacred site protection. You may also find results that are more focus on entire ecosystems than singular species focused conservation.	}